The etymology of the word ‘manifesto’ comes from the Latin word ‘manifestus’ meaning ‘plain’, ‘obvious’, ‘evident’. Therefore, a manifesto by definition introduces statements or, better, slogans rather than arguments (we can argue between us of course!!!). We intend to make use of a structure similar to a Tractatus, in which the content actually is paradoxically contradictory with its format and axiomatic structure. Think about propositions such as sloganized expressions with a strong logical and speculative content. Our work is an open-ended job to the extent that (a) it is open to any contribution from inside and outside D&I; (b) it includes not only statements but questions as well. Some of the statements have obvious assonances between them, others not. Sometimes you may recognize the answer to a question in the statements following the question. We would like that all of you start to support cooperatively this project. The output should be proudly the output of School of Design & Innovation @Tongji University. But a git-festo about what? Questions sometimes can be more illustrative than statements.
1. 1.	Design is the benchmark of intelligence: are not us the ones everybody is waiting for?

1. 2.	We have at least the responsibility to explore how AI can support design and how design can support AI. Do we wish to decline this challenge?

1. 3.	We have as well responsibilities towards our students. Is not irresponsible to decline such responsibility? Is not irresponsible to avoid exploring new territories and build new maps together with them? If not us, then who?

1. 4.	Design’s future could have tremendous opportunities thanks to AI. If we do not get in the wagon right now then we will miss the train. Lots of opportunities and money are going around AI. Is not it crazy to miss these opportunities?

1. 5.	China is the perfect place and D&I the perfect scchool. If not us, then who? If not now, then when? If not here, then where?

1. 6.	AI & Design together can contribute to the survival of this planet and improve our own well-being (design designs design). Are we going to give up?

1. 7.	Political, social, ethical, and cultural changes are incubating a new world: do not you want to be an actor of this change or you prefer to be just a spectator?

