D1. Theoretically, AI can replace any kind of job either mechanical or intellectual. As it is portrayed in movies, science, or science fiction, it is an antagonist to human beings. Such a possibility is, of course, scary, threatening, and apocalyptic but it is also perfect, ideal, and utopian. Imagine a world where everything is done by machines: cooking, cleaning, driving, but also entertaining, teaching, even healing. No labor workers would be needed: no chefs, cleaners, drivers, teachers, entertainers, doctors. The so-called middle class would be enjoying life like paradise. We can finally sit down and relax while machines do all the dirty, tedious, and complex labor.

D2. The whole of humanity should be working towards the AI dream. But are we? Instead, what we see is a chaotic society, disease-ridden, financially exhausted, politically incompetent, and resources depleted. Humans are out of control. Human intelligence has failed to bring harmony in the society. It is incapable of anticipating, addressing, and fixing extremely complex problems. AI is not helping. Quite the opposite. The more AI is been used by humans, the more the problems exacerbate. The more human workers are eliminated from jobs, the more smart cities are constructed, the more intelligent weapons are devised, the more social, economic, and political problems are created. What is the purpose of AI if it fails to serve even the slightest social provisions? What is the purpose of an AI chef when I can't decide what to eat, or an AI driver when I can't move my car, or an AI washer when I have too many clothes or none?

D3. AI brings abundance, and abundance brings scarcity. The more convenient things are, the more desire we have for more and more, which leads to scarcity. AI can increase productivity but cannot increase resources and we are running out of resources. So, 'why AI now?' AI has been around for at least 60 years, and most of the theories that today are being used for the latest AI tools have been stagnant for decades. And yet, in the last five years, there has been an explosion in the use and promise of AI. Are problems caused by AI or is AI designed to cause problems? Is it possible that AI will become the cause of the demise of the middle class as movies, science, or science fiction have predicted? How do we prevent, redirect, or address that possibility? How do we design a social system in which humans and AI can live together in harmony?

D4. The concept of a smart city is one of the main promises of the AI age. But why do we need a city if it's smart? Wasn't the birth and purpose of the city to be a place where peasants gathered in order to make things easier? A necessary evil: a place where the inconvenience of confinement allowed the division of labor that allowed the inhabitants to enjoy more free time and less personal labor? If we can enjoy the convenience of the city while living in the countryside, why do we need cities?

D5. An old proverb says that the opposite of good is not bad but better. We can say by analogy that the opposite of smart is not dumb but smarter. So, in that sense, if there is 'smarter', why do we need 'smart'? If we have something that is smarter than a lawyer, doctor, professor, author, actor, why do we need an actual lawyer, doctor, professor, author, or actor? In other words, if there is a better me, why do I need me?

D6. China is at the forefront of AI research. Isn't that a contradiction? China has one of the biggest middle classes in the world, so theoretically AI would be the enemy of its own people. Why then is the government pushing AI breakthroughs, experiments, and research. For whom is AI intended? For what? Is AI a hint to imagine an Erewhonian social model?

D7. When the virus hit the world, China used AI to face the threat. Security cameras, tracing software, ten-day hospitals, package delivery networks, or testing probes all employed AI methods to eliminate the plague. AI became the means to serve the people. AI is portrayed as the friend, the facilitator, the hope of the nation. Clearly, designing smart systems is the next step, but what is the ultimate objective?

D8. When the western economic systems started to tremble and collapse, AI was strangely absent. What is the purpose of AI when it cannot re-organize, protect, or address the complex macro-economic problems? Where are the so-called intelligent trading systems, digital banking, smart economy, or cryptocurrencies? Everything was left to humans. Why? Did the absence of AI create the problem or did the reliance on AI create the problem? When you design an automated system, you eliminate a manual need. What happens when the automated system stops working? Who automates the automated?

D9. AI is a contradiction in terms: how can something be intelligent but not human? Intelligence needs intention, purpose, or aim and only humans possess those qualities that are necessary conditions to address intelligence. How can a machine be intelligent let alone think? The question is valid but tricky. If we look into the notions of design, device, machine, or building we cannot help but notice that they are both nouns and verbs. If seen as nouns, then they don't necessarily need intention. They are just things. Things have no intention. If a design, a device, a machine, or a building is malfunctioning it is still doing something but it is definitely not intentional. What if the malfunction is better, more efficient, or does something different than the originally intended function? Then who is responsible for the new behavior? Can AI be unintentionally intentional?

D10. Design needs AI. Does AI need design? We know what we know, but we do not know what we do not know. Knowledge comes from thinking. But human thinking has limits set by the limits of our own minds. Thinking through a machine is new. AI is the new rabbit hole through the looking glass. How do we get our way in and out of the hole? Code. The code is the passport to the alien country of AI. Without a passport, you can't enter. You will always stay outside wondering what is going on inside. But with a passport, you can travel anywhere in this imaginary land. Explore every corner of it. Then come back and tell us about your trip, your adventures, your findings. Isn't this what design is?

D11. The common belief is that computers are just tools. The same thing happened for many years in the field of design. Computer-aided design was seen by designers as a tool that would help them. It turns out that CAD was affecting their way of designing in a subliminal profound way. We referred to this phenomenon as 'form follows software'. We suspect that the same thing is happening now. AI is seen as a tool to enhance people's lives. But it's not that only. It's a subliminal system that affects the way we think in a profound way. In a similar motto: 'thinking follows AI'.

D12. Currently, data is the main focus of AI. But if we look back into the origins of AI, the focus then was on algorithms and intelligence such as heuristics, expert systems, automated design, etc. Only recently, because of the structure of neural networks (which are essentially pattern recognition systems), data became important. Thus, for designers the objective of deep neural networks is plurality: offer to the user as many choices as possible and they will be happy. Is that working? Maybe temporarily. But, if we don't know what we want, how can AI help us? Is more data the answer?

D13. If we are the only creatures that can think, how do we know that we are thinking? Who says that we are thinking at all? What if we are just here to procreate. Thinking is just a means to survive so we can procreate. We are not really thinking. At least, we have no witnesses to verify that we do. On the other hand, AI does not need to survive or procreate. So even the tiny little bit that AI 'thinks', is the real thinking. Maybe then, we should observe AI so that we can understand what real thinking is.


Part 2


D14. Artificial intelligence is usually seen as an extension, replacement, or alternative to human intelligence. In that sense, ideas, theories, and practices about artificial intelligence are sought to be found at the boundaries of human intelligence. But intelligence can also be sought in the opposite direction: at its origin. Every day millions of kids are taught how to be more intelligent. Parents, school, friends are all trying to teach kids patterns of thought that would help them survive, adjust, or compete in human society. But these patterns are not intelligent per se. They are just pieces of knowledge that improve their intelligence because kids are already intelligent at birth. Somehow without knowledge, they are able to figure out things in ways unconventional, different, or alternative.

D15. It is not that humans are not capable of doing the things that AI promises to do. Theoretically, we are capable of doing anything except we don't have the time or the resources. If we had all the time in the world and all the resources in the world we could do anything. But we don't have. Does AI have more than we do? Is AI our alter ego?

D16. There's only one thing that we cannot do. Be random to ourselves. We can be random to others, but not to ourselves. As an old proverb says 'I can fool anybody but me'. Even a mistake is not random: it is an intentional unintention. But AI can be random to itself because it doesn't have a self. We suffer and enjoy the tautological condition called 'consciousness'.

D17. Whatever we cannot do, we can imagine. The limits of the human world are the limits of the human imagination. But where are those limits? How do we know that which we cannot imagine if we cannot imagine it? Is AI the tool to fathom the unimaginable?

D18. Capitalism is based on exploitation. Humans exploit land, animals, resources, machines, and other humans. Capitalism doesn't come out of nowhere. Somebody cultivates, justifies, and approves exploitation. Somebody cultivates social racism, justifies international looting, and approves Ponzi economies. It is not a political-economic system any more than an ethical system. Can AI be used by capitalism to continue to exploit in even more sophisticated ways? If the answer is yes, then can AI be used by non-capitalist countries to prevent, avoid, or reduce exploitation?

D19. In a capitalist society, designers can be used as symbols of exploitation. A genius architect, a star designer, an unconventional musician, or a provocative chef sells much more. Unfortunately, people cannot tell the difference between acting and reality. AI is not human. AI design can only be judged from the results, not the intention.

D20. Designers have yet to be replaced by AI. Human creativity, imagination, and ingenuity is far superior to AI. Why? Is it because of human ability or social expectations? Design for the masses is not creative.  It is not about creating new unique designs but rather about selecting an appropriate type of design from an abstract typology of designs. For example, local village 'architects' are not regarded as extraordinary, talented, or unique but rather as common, average, and conventional workers. Do you know of any famous village architect? Why? Similarly, fashion design, music composition, drama (e.g. soap opera) authoring, or cooking are also based on patterns of existing types or on selections from a range of preexisting patterns. In such a world, can AI help?

D21. Coding has been seen by many designers as an impediment to creativity. Having to put someone's thoughts in a rational manner is incompatible to any holistic, imaginative, and atypical thinking process, such as design. Of course, we all agree that designers should learn how to code in order to deal with mundane, tedious, and repetitive work, but not to replace the creative process. Creativity cannot be codified. It is a human privilege. But here is a dilemma: are we creative because we create things, or do we create things because we are creative? This last sentence may sound as if it is the same thing but it's not so. It is a very profound question because it questions the origin of creativity. In other words, are we the only ones who are creative because we are embedded with creativity, or are we using the power of creativity to become creative. Because if you believe that the second is true, then other things can be creative too since it's not a human privilege exclusively. Could one of those things be AI?

D22. The research and development of CAD, virtual reality, augmented reality, gaming, IoT, or AI are all considered fields of computer science. Designers are supposed to use these fields to get inspired and find design solutions. Why? Billions of dollars are being directed to computer science schools to do research on something that they don't even know. How can computer scientists understand what are the needs of a designer when they don't even know what design is? And worse, designers are supposed to wait from those who don't know to get something that they don't even know if it's going to be harmful to them, as it has been proven in the past (see 'form follows software'). Meanwhile, design schools are very poor relative to computer science schools, because they let the money fly over them. Why? Is it because designers don't know how to code?

D23. Code is not a computer language only. Coding is a way of thinking. Coding involves logic, math, data, structures, classes, interfaces, objects, conditions, repetition, recursion, graphics, syntax, expressions, symbols, grammar, semantics, rules. Then, why is coding different from designing?
