Every year new students register at design schools. Four year later, we are all gather on the day of graduation faced with a big problem. While these students are happy to get out into the world and challenge it,  they are also thrown into a world of uncertainty. Many of the things that we teach them are not valid soon after. Many of the ideas, aspirations, directions that we give them maybe useless. But also some of the seemingly unrelated things that they learned may be of great value. The question is why? Why is it that a profession that has been always thought of as a triumph of the human spirit is being constantly challenged by a machine that has no inspiration, no idea, or no talent?  From computer aided design systems, virtual reality, and gaming all the way to big data, neural networks, quantum computing, the world of designers is being constantly challenged. That is not to say that it is shrinking, although it is in its traditional terms, but also, at the same time, it expands searching for new territories to explore as new worlds are opening and old worlds are closing.

In the last ten years, the discipline of design is curiously unaware of major breakthroughs in computation and artificial intelligence that can drastically alter, transform, or even redefine its current practice, education, and ideology. Increasingly, new computational techniques are permeating the design world revealing unfathomable, unimaginable, and often unexplainable behaviours, yet admirable, enviable and therefore worrisome. Is it possible for a computer to design without a designer? While this question would have been needless, unnecessary, or perhaps audacious ten years ago, today it is not. Today, computational systems are replacing one-by-one white collar jobs some of which are not even repetitive but rather creative. From phone conversation agents to journalists and from medical experts to interpreters and drivers, one-by-one the limits of human creativity are challenged, breached, or extended. Until when?

More than ever now because of the dependency on technology in contemporary design practice, the notions of human consciousness, expression, and intentionality have raised critical questions of identity, authenticity, or responsibility at least on the side of the designer. Who is the designer today and how important are one's own ideas versus the techniques provided in an increasingly digitally dominated world? Can it be claimed that the use of digital technologies in design, as well as in everyday activities, has deep and profound implications not only in the way thoughts and ideas are conceived, understood, and communicated but also in their intrinsic value and validity?  Is it possible to design without a computer today? Is it possible that digital techniques have become determinant conditions, perhaps hidden, upon which the designers, practitioners, or critics base their ideas, thoughts, or even ideologies? How important is for designers to know the mechanisms of software or hardware and therefore the limits that these technologies impose on design and does that even matter anymore?

This manifesto is not about science fiction, prophecy, or satire. It is not even about criticizing the current condition of design practice, education, and theory.  There is no time, relevance, or need for that. The clock is ticking and the world as we know it is rapidly changing.  New strategies, schemes, and theories are needed urgently to discern, adjust, restructure, and potentially capitalize from the upcoming "tsunami". An informed, daring, innovative, yet responsible, universal, and challenging vision is needed. China has entered rather aggressively the chase for artificial intelligence. Given the pace, thirst, and capabilities, it may be safely assumed that rather soon significant breakthroughs will be made on artificial creativity. Neural networks driven by big data using quantum level speeds are aimed at replacing, extending, or even exceeding human capabilities. Is that a threat or a challenge to design? What if design as we know it today will get replaced by creative computational systems? What then?
